This is Part 1 of a 2-part Blender tutorial
covering the very basics of setting up materials
and shading in Blender. I’ll give a thorough
overview of how to add materials, how basic
material nodes work, and we’ll cover some of
the more common nodes you’ll use. In part 2,
we will get in to PBR texture materials
which are super realistic materials.
I’ll save some quick but valuable tips
for the end. If nodes are confusing,
I promise this should demystify
a lot of it for you. Let’s go.
A quick note, I will be doing everything
in Cycles. These materials will work
in Eevee too but sometimes the settings are a
little bit off between the two render engines.
We start with materials at the material properties
panel. With an object selected, this panel
displays materials assigned to the object.
This is a default material that’s assigned.
Objects can have more than one material
assigned to them in these material slots.
Pressing the plus icon adds a new material
slot but there’s no material in the second
slot yet. We can either use this
drop down box to choose a material
already in our Blender scene or we can press
“New” to create a new one. Let’s do that.
With the new material selected, a few tabs get
added below. We have preview, surface, volume,
displacement, settings and a few more.
By default, there will be nothing in the
displacement, nothing in the volume, but under
surface we have a whole bunch of settings.
And preview is just the preview of the
material. You can choose different shapes
to have the material previewed on.
But these three - the surface,
volume and displacement are the
three channels a material can have.
Surface is everything on the outside surface
of the object. Like paint, wood, metal,
etc. It’s what you’re going to use the most.
Volume is how you want the three dimensional
space inside the object to be filled. You’d
use this if you wanted to make smoke or fog
inside of an object. You’d also use it
for liquids, clouds, things like that.
Displacement is physical movement,
or displacement, of the mesh.
An example of when you’d use this is if you had a
brick wall and you wanted it so detailed that the
mesh actually popped outwards on the bricks
and sunk in where the mortar was. There are
other ways to fake this look and we’ll get into
that in part 2, but that’s what displacement is.
Let’s look at surface for now. Everything on
this panel is basically a summary of what’s
actually been created using nodes in the shader
editor. For simple materials, you can handle all
the settings right here, but once they get more
complex you’ll want to jump over to the nodes.
At the top, it says surface and then it says
“Principled BSDF.” The principled BSDF is the
default shader for materials in Blender. It is
a very versatile shader that can create many of
the things you’ll want to make. What is a shader
by the way? A shader is a calculation of how to
output materials and how those materials
will interact with light in your scene.
If we click the name of the shader, we can
choose from a long list of other shaders.
We aren’t going to cover them all and you won’t
use very many of them. This shader doesn’t have
many options, but the Principled BSDF has a lot
more settings because it can do a lot more stuff.
Remember how we added the second material. Well,
the first material is the material currently
assigned to the plane by default. When a material
is placed in the first slot, it gets assigned to
the entire object. To change materials, we can go
into edit mode, select the portion of the mesh we
want to assign the second material to. Select the
material and then press “assign.” We could select
different parts of the mesh and assign different
materials to different parts in this way.
We can select the material slot
and press minus to remove the slot.
The removed material will still be available
to add to objects later until we close Blender.
We can double click on the material in the slot,
or down here and rename it. I’ll rename it to
“Subscribe” just as a little reminder for you
to subscribe and turn on notifications
so you don’t miss future tutorials.
This is as far as we are going right here.
We are now heading over to the Shader Editor.
The best way to get there is to change
to the shading workspace at the top.
Before we go any farther, there is an addon in
Blender called “Node Wrangler” that you want
to have turned on pretty much all the
time. Go to edit, preferences, add ons
and search for node wrangler. Check
the box next to it to activate it.
This addon enables a lot of things you can
do with the nodes. It should really just be
incorporated into Blender by default
but for technical reasons it’s not.
If your workspace isn’t
exactly like mine, don’t worry.
The important things are you should have
a 3D viewport set to material preview mode
and you should have this big area known
as the shader editor. The properties
panel should be over here on the side.
Let’s just cover a few basic things about
the shader editor. In the top left, we
see a drop down box that says “object.”
This means the shader editor is set to work
on object materials, which is what we want.
But we can change this to work on shading of the
world - which is the background of the scene, the
sky etc. This is how you could add an HDR image
to light your scene or to serve as a background.
Up here we have some of the same
controls from the materials panel.
It shows our material slots and the materials
assigned to them. Now let’s talk about nodes.
We have the principled BSDF node assigned to this
material. This large node is the principled bsdf
with all the same options we
saw in the materials panel.
But, you will always have this material output
node as well. You can select a node and press
“G” to move it around or just click and drag it.
Many of the same shortcuts of Blender work in the
shader editor. If I have a node selected, Shift+D
duplicates it. Shift+A is how we add a new node.
And X deletes a node.
The material output node
is the final output of whatever information
your nodes create. It has three channels. I
mentioned these earlier. The Principled BSDF
is a surface shader so it’s plugged into the
surface input of this final output node.
All information in node editors flows from
theleft to the right. So you put information into
the nodes on the left side, the nodes do something
with that information and put out new information
on the right. Because the material output node is
the final output where all the nodes end, it only
has inputs on the left side. These dots for inputs
and outputs are called sockets. The principled
BSDF node has a whole bunch of input sockets on
the left but only one output socket on the right.
You’ll notice the sockets are different colors.
A green socket represents complete shader
information. If a node has a green output on it,
it is considered a “shader” meaning it can
be an end product that can be plugged into
the final output node. You’ll often hear
“node” and “shader” used interchangeably,
but technically only some nodes - the nodes
with green outputs - are actually shaders.
Yellow sockets indicate color information.
So, this base color for example,
we could plug any sort of color information
into this and the socket will recognize it
as color. This could be a color image.
The grey sockets are value inputs. These
could be numerical values of any kind, but often
range between zero and one. Many of these settings
on the BSDF have values that range from zero to
one. Zero means there’s none of the effect and
one means the effect is turned all the way up.
Let’s look at roughness as an example. Roughness
is how rough a material’s surface is
and it affects the reflection of light.
Zero would be a completely smooth surface which
is unrealistic for most materials. One would be
very rough. You can actually click this value and
type in a value higher than one if you want to.
These grey sockets can also accept black
and white or grey scale values. Why are
black and white or grey scale images important?
Well it’s unlikely that you’ll want a material to
be exactly the same roughness everywhere.
So, these zero to one values allow us to
map values to different areas of the material
using black and white or gray scale coloring.
Here’s an example of a roughness map that can
be plugged into this socket. Zero is represented
by black. One is represented by white and
everything in between is represented by a
shade of grey. The darker the gray, the closer
it is to zero so the lower the effect will be
in that part of the material. And the lighter
it is, the closer it is to one so the effect
will be stronger there. This image plugged into
this roughness socket would use grey scale data
to map out roughness values over the object.
So, that’s what the grey sockets are - they’re
value inputs that can also be
mapped with grey scale images.
This concept will be important in both procedural
and PBR texturing that we cover in part two.
The last color here is purple. Purple sockets deal
with vector information which is information that
either tells Blender where to map something or
where to move something. It’s hard to explain,
but you’ll see this mostly with normal maps
and material mapping which we will cover soon.
For the most part, you usually plug outputs
into like-colored input sockets. So, green
always needs to go to green, purple into
purple, etc. This is not 100% always the
case with yellows and greys. Sometimes you
have a black and white output that you’re
going to use in a color socket and vice versa.
But, yellows are looking for color information
and greys won’t recognize color information
other than black, white and grey scale.
So the Principled BSDF shader in Blender has a
lot of settings. Probably more than any other
because it does a lot of things. This was only
added to Blender a few years ago and before,
you actually had to combine a lot of nodes to
be able to do what this node can do by itself.
It’s important enough to go over a
lot of these settings. I’ll be honest,
some of them I’ve never used and am not
going to be able to adequately explain.
But, base color is pretty self-explanatory. It’s
the starting color of the material without any
effects like reflectiveness
or roughness added to it.
The next three are for subsurface scattering
which is what happens to light that penetrates
the surface and scatters underneath it. The
best example of this is human skin. When light
hits skin, some of it goes through and scatters
underneath giving it a pinkish hue. The subsurface
scattering settings can replicate that effect.
Metallic. I’ll try to explain this as best I
can. Materials that are truly metal have a
reflective property but also have their own color,
so it’s different than say a glass mirror.
There are two basic workflows for shading that
you’ll see and they are a metalness workflow and a
specular workflow. Some artists choose to use the
metallic input and some the specular, depending
on the material and their personal preferences.
These are different from each other but are both
ways of giving a material reflective properties.
Roughness we kind of covered, but it’s
how rough the surface is on a very tiny,
nearly microscopic level and affects the
reflection. Paper has a high roughness value.
On a microscopic level, it is not smooth and that
roughness will make it not reflect light as well.
Most glass will have a very low roughness and
even at the microscopic level is very smooth.
Anistropic, sheen and clearcoat are some
advanced characteristics you can give
a material that we aren’t going to cover
right now. Transmission is how much light
is allowed to pass through the material
rather than be reflected off of it.
Emission is light that the material actually
emits from itself. You can give the emitted
light its own color and strength. You can actually
use this to have objects light your scene or for a
variety of effects. If you’re emitting light
from a material it’s usually going to drown
out any other settings you have up
here so this is usually used by itself.
There’s also an emission shader that only
does emission if you want to use that instead.
Alpha is transparency. Wherever you see the
word alpha in pretty much any graphics software,
it’s referring to the transparent quality. One
is no transparency (a little backwards it seems)
and zero is full transparency. That’s
just how alpha values work. Of course,
this and all these other settings can be mapped
to an object so you could have parts of your
material transparent and parts not transparent.
You would use a grey scale map for to do this.
The normal input is for a normal map. Normal
maps are a way to fake depth and shadows in
your material without actually changing the
geometry of the mesh. They are very useful.
Here’s an image of a surface with no normal
map. And here’s an image with the normal
map. No difference in the actual mesh, just using
normal data to fake the look of depth and height.
Alright, so let’s look at some other node
options in the Blender shader editor.
To add a node in the shader editor, you
press Shift+A and you get this menu. The
nodes are all categorized into groups and
there are quite a few of them. Often you’ll
know what node you’re looking for and can
search for it by name in the search field.
You’ll see a category called “shader.” Remember
a shader is a node with a finished output ready
to be plugged into the output node.
Some of them are for surfaces,
some are for volume. You can also go over here
in the shader properties and see the options for
different shaders. Most of them are very simple,
don’t have a lot of inputs or are designed to do
one very specific thing. Like the glass
shader. The Principled BSDF is so useful
that it’s almost always what you start with.
The mix shader can be added to combine two
shaders together. I will duplicate this
shader and show you how to mix two shaders.
I’ll give one a red base color and one
a blue base color for demonstration.
To connect sockets, you can drag the output socket
of one node over to the input socket of another
and when it’s connected, this line will appear
to show the path of the information. There are
a few ways to disconnect a shader and one of
them is to just click the output connection,
drag it off and let go. I’ve got a faster way
as one of my tips at the end of the video.
By the way, I would love to get a like
on this video if you’ve made it this far,
it really helps and is really, really
appreciated. Thank you so much!
If you drag and drop a node onto a
connection, Blender will insert it for you
between the two nodes - if it can, meaning if
there are appropriate sockets to plug into.
So back to the mix shader. It has
two green inputs for you to connect
two shaders you want to combine. The
factor, which you will see a lot,
is how you want the shaders combined. With this
setup, turning it all the way to zero will be
100% the top shader. Turning it all the
way to one will be 100% the bottom shader.
Putting it somewhere in the middle will
be a faded combination of both shaders.
But, you notice the factor shader has a grey
input node. This means we can map this factor.
If we plugged in a grey scale map or a node
that maps values from zero to one, we would
tell Blender to put the top shader where there is
black and the bottom shader where there is white
and to mix the two together where there is grey.
I’m going to leave these two shaders connected.
And we are going to look at a few other
important nodes that come into play.
We’ll press shift+a and in the search bar, type
in “color” and choose the color ramp node. You
will use this node a lot. It’s a gradient node.
It defaults with two gradient points, a black on
the far left and a white on the far right with a
completely smooth and linear transition between.
There are different settings to choose for how
the gradient is interpolated - that means how it
transitions or fades from one point to another.
It also has a factor input on the left and on
the right, it has both a color output and
an alpha output. The color ramp can generate
color information. You can select one of these
points and choose a color. This can be used for
all sorts of gradients in your materials. You can
click the plus icon to add a control point. This
could allow you to add a new color to the
gradient or just use it for more control.
The color ramp is often used as a factor input
and this is one of those times where you will
actually plug a yellow color output
into a grey input socket. IF.. your
colors are all going to be grey scale.
We will see the color ramp again soon.
One category of material nodes
in Blender is texture nodes.
Shift+A to add a node and find the category
labeled texture. These are a bunch of different
ways to procedurally create black and white or
grey scale textures that can later be combined
and tweaked to get procedural looks that you want.
We’ll look at the musgrave texture first, which is
commonly used to add procedural grunge effects.
I’ll plug the height output into the color input
of the Principled BSDF just to show you what it
looks like. Since Musgrave is outputting black
and white color, it’s ok to plug it into the
color input socket so long as we understand we
are only getting black and white out of it.
This is the basic musgrave texture pattern.
There are different types of musgrave you can
choose from here. Where it says 3D, you can
choose other dimensions, I almost always leave
it at 3D although 2D would work since the plane
is a 2D object. Choosing 4D adds a W value down
here and whenever you see the W value in shading,
it’s an animation factor. It can make
the texture move over time. Change the W
and the texture moves. You can keyframe this value
to have the texture be animated which is awesome.
The other settings also adjust
the look of the musgrave. Scale
and detail are probably the most helpful.
A very, very common use of the color ramp
that we looked at before is to add it after a
texture node, so let’s do that. Shift+A and we
find the color ramp under converter. For nodes you
use repeatedly, I’ve got some tips to add them to
the editor faster at the end of this video.
So let’s drop the color ramp in between the
musgrave texture and the principled shader.
Notice this now has a grey socket into a grey
socket on the left and yellow into a yellow on
the right. It’s almost like it was meant to be.
The colorramp now acts as a gradient control for
the transitioning between black and white areas
in the texture node. If we move the white closer
to the black, it shortens the transitional fade
between black and white on the texture. Moving
the black up will remove some of the white.
Another trick is to select the white, then use
the color selector here. Darken the white and it
subdues the texture pattern everywhere.
And lastly, since the color ramp does
output RGB colors, we can change the colors to
actually output a colored texture if we want.
I’ll quickly show you some other
texture nodes and we’ll move on.
Voronoi, voronoi, voronoi is a useful texture
that you can get a lot of cool looks out of.
The brick texture allows you
to make procedural bricks or
blocky textures. Lots of settings on this one.
The wave texture allows you to add bands or rings.
Here’s the really interesting part. These
textures can be used as inputs for other textures.
I could plug the voronoi into the wave scale
and get this. I could plug the musgrave into
the scale and get this. Or plug the voronoi
into the musgrave and get something like this.
There are endless combinations of these you
can use to get different effects. And there
are countless Blender tutorials out there that
show you different ways to play around with this.
Another way to mix and combine texturing
effects or colors is using the Mix
RGB node. The Mix RGB node in Blender acts
just like the Mix Shader we looked at earlier
but instead of being for shader outputs, it’s
for color - including greyscale color values.
I’ll add a Mix RGB node. I’ll plug a musgrave
texture into one yellow socket and a voronoi
texture into another. Again, we have this factor
setting that controls how much of each one we get.
For this one, we also have a lot of different
Blending modes. If you’ve used other graphics
software like Photoshop or whatever, you’ve
probably seen these before. They are different
formulas for how to blend colors together.
Not gonna go into a lot of detail in here,
but the default mix might give you a
very different effect than “add” or
“multiply” would and depending on what you’re
going for, you may use different blend modes.
For demonstration, I’m going to add a wave
texture and plug it into the factor to control
how these two textures are mixed together.
You see the bands from the wave texture have
separated where the musgrave and voronoi show up.
Of course adding a color ramp in here can give us
even more control. Or we could add color to
this. We’ve used one texture node as a map
for how to combine two other texture
nodes. And this is a very simple setup.
There are endless combinations of how you
can mix and match textures to get all sorts
of procedural effects. And again there are
tons of tutorials on different ways to do it.
So now let’s talk about mapping textures
onto an object. With this simple texture,
it isn’t that big of a deal but it will be
with a more complicated and when we get into
PBR texturing in part 2. To add a texture mapping
setup to this, we actually have to add two nodes.
The first is a mapping node. This node’s
purple vector output will plug into the
purple vector input here. And we immediately
notice that the entire texture disappears.
This node is a control node with all
the mapping controls. But it doesn’t
even know where to start without the help of
another node, the texture coordinate node.
The texture coordinate node has a bunch of
different ways that the texture can be told
how to be mapped in Blender. Different uses may
require different outputs here. Generally for
procedural things, Object is going to be your
best bet. But, you see this has adjusted the
material based on the size of the object. So, an
alternative could be the “generated” which is kind
of just the default. When we get to PBR stuff,
where we will actually be using images that may
need to be placed on very specific parts of the
mesh, as well as multiple images which need to be
placed in the exact same way, we will use UV.
So this mapping node gives us all sorts of
control on where this texture is mapped on
the object. We can change the location along
all three axes. This is only a 2 dimensional
object, so some of this isn’t as important.
We can rotate the material and we can scale
the material along each of the three axes.
One main point on nodes we should mention
here is an output can go into many inputs,
but an input can only have
one connection going into it.
Often, we’ll use the same mapping setup
and feed it into multiple different nodes.
But, if we try to feed two nodes into
one input, it’s not going to work.
Another node you will see used a lot is the math
node. I hate math, but this node isn’t too bad.
It could be plugged in between two other nodes and
then it can run a simple math formula on the data
before it gets to the second node. Remember
black and white values have values of zero
and one respectively. Well, maybe you want
to amplify those values by multiplying them.
Or maybe you want to take two values and add them
together. The math node does this and a lot more.
Sometimes in Blender, you want something
to be transparent or translucent.
There are both transparent and translucent
shaders in Blender that can be combined
with other shaders or used by themselves.
More often, I find the glass shader useful.
On this, you’ll see an IOR setting. Whenever you
see IOR it means Index of Refraction, which is one
of the terms I cover in my Blender Terminology
video that I recommend beginners check out.
Different materials reflect light at different
angles. Your regular glass has an IOR of 1.45
which is the default value for this node.
Other materials like plastic, water,
thicker or thinner glass will have different
IOR’s. So the glass shader can actually be
used for more than just glass. The roughness
value can be adjusted and this is a good
demonstration of what roughness does. Higher is
less reflective while lower is more reflective.
Everything we’ve covered so far has dealt with
the surface channel of materials but volume is
something you might want to use as well. There
are only a handful of volume shaders and I’ll
need a 3 dimensional object to demonstrate this.
So I’ll add a cube and give it a new material.
I’ll delete the principled shader because I don’t
want this object to have a surface, I just want it
to have volume. The object turns black until
you plug something into the volume channel.
Volume absorption means the volume will absorb
light as it passes through an object. This is kind
of what happens when you’re looking into a pond
and light starts to disappear as it gets deeper.
Volume scatter is more like what you see
with fog and every scene is better with a
little fog in it. With volume scatter, light
hits the volume and bounces around. This can
be very demanding on a computer to calculate so
if your computer struggles with Blender, volume
shading might not work for you at the moment.
There’s also the principled volume shader which
combines the two in the most realistic way
possible and it’s probably the one to use
most of the time. It also hasn’t been
around forever and before you had to
mix a scatter and absorption node together
got get what this node can do by itself.
We plug the volume into the volume channel and
we get this, some pretty dense fog. We can slide
the density down to reduce the fog, but notice
it’s a very uniform fog throughout the object.
Using texture nodes, color ramps and other
things we can tweak this density value to
get really cool effects. I’ll add a noise texture,
which we didn’t really cover, but it’s similar to
the musgrave texture node. This one has a factor
output which we can plug into the density input of
the volume shader. It might be difficult to see,
but as we adjust the scale of this noise texture,
there are sort of noisy pockets of
fog that we can adjust the size of.
We could add a color ramp between these
two to adjust the fog similarly to how
we adjusted things with the surface material.
We can change the color of the volume which might
make this easier to see. We can have the fog give
off its own light which isn’t really realistic
but it can create a cool effect. There are a
lot of other things to play around with here too.
And I should point out we see a new color socket
here. These blue sockets are for attribute
inputs which is, as of this recording,
a fairly new feature of Blender that I haven’t
fully wrapped my head around yet. They’re useful
in geometry nodes which are an entirely different
use of nodes that this video is not getting into.
What you could do with this object is to make
the object huge and have it encompass your entire
scene to add fog to it, but remember volume is
very demanding when rendering so use with caution
and don’t go crazier than you need to with it.
Since we are using a noise texture to control
the fog density here, we could change it to 4D
which gives us that W value we discussed before.
We could use that along with keyframes
to animate the density of the fog.
Hard to see in preview mode but it could
look something like this when rendered out.
I promised some helpful tips at
the end of Part 1 so here we go.
When you find yourself adding the same node to a
lot of materials. Like the color ramp for example,
you can speed this up two ways. Press Shift+A
to add a material. Find the node you want and
right-click it. You can either add a shortcut
for the node. By doing this, you’ll be prompted
to press a key to create a shortcut. But,
how many keys do you have on your keyboard?
Some useless trivia - the standard
keyboard actually has 101 keys on it.
I didn’t count them, I Googled it.
What I prefer is to add nodes to my
quick favorites menu. Right click the
node and choose add to quick favorites.
Now, when in the shader editor, we can press “Q”
and a short menu of your favorite nodes appear.
With the node wrangler addon enabled you can do
so many things and here are just a few of them.
Make sure you remember to turn
on the node wrangler addon.
If you want to disconnect a
node connection, press control
and then right click on your mouse. With those
pressed, just cut through the connections you
want to disconnect and they’re gone. You can
do this across multiple connections at once.
In Blender, it’s often useful to see what one
single node in your node tree is contributing.
You can do this as long as node wrangler is turned
on. Hold down Control Shift on your keyboard and
then click on a node. It connects that node into
this viewer node and then into the final output.
So you can Control Shift click around to see
what your nodes all look like by themselves.
When you’re done, Control Shift Click the
final shader node and it’ll go back to normal.
When you have a texture node in your editor
and want to connect it to a mapping and texture
coordinate node, you can save a lot of time
by selecting the node and pressing Control T.
It automatically sets up the connection for you.
Here are a few ways to organize your nodes. You
can drag with your mouse to select several nodes
and then press CONTROL + J and it will frame these
nodes. You can click the frame and drag the entire
frame around. You can still move nodes around
within the frame and the frame will adjust its
size as needed. Press “N” on your keyboard
to open up a sidebar in the shader editor.
Here you can label the frame, let’s give
it a nice name that you should remember.
You can check color and give it a color
background. Under properties, you can
increase the size of the label up to 64 font.
This is a great way to organize large node trees.
You can also create node groups. Let’s
say we wanted this node and this node to
be condensed into one single node. Select them
and press Control+G. Whoa, what just happened?
Blender created a node group with a group input,
then the two nodes and then a group output. Press
“tab” to go back to our node tree. Here, the two
nodes have been combined into one node group.
We can again name the group, give it a
color and pressing tab while it’s selected
will take us back into the node group.
If we had a value inside the node group
that we wanted controlled without having to
tab into the node group, we can connect the
empty socket on the group input into the value
we want to control. Now tab out, and we see we
can control that strength value right here from
the group node. Super useful to stay organized.
In Part 2 of this Blender tutorial, I’m gonna
cover PBR textures which use images to create
super realistic materials. I’ll have more
quick tips at the end of Part 2 as well.
My name is Brandon and I’m
a Blender Artist. Thank you,
thank you, thank you for all your support
and I’ll see you in Part 2. Stay creative!